HISTORY OF DATABSE

Navigational database

The advent of computers in the early 1960s marked the beginning of computerised databases.
Charles Bachman designed the first database known as the Integrated Data Store, followed by the Information Management System developed by IBM. 
These databases were navigational, requiring users to navigate through the entire database to find the information they wanted. 
The two main models of this navigational database were the hierarchical model developed by IBM and the network model introduced at the Conference on Data Systems Languages (CODASYL).

Hierarchical Model (by IBM)

1) In this model root segment is mother of all parent segments.

Parent Segment - It has one or more child segments, it can also be child segment

Leaves - These are segments which doesn't have child segments(node)

2) There are 2 kinds of associations 
    Logical associations - One child segment has one parent segment, Parent can have multiple child segments
    Illogical associations - child nodes are associated with more than one parent (Having many-to-many relationships, circular dependencies)

Segment - A structured unit of data storage that represent record or group of fields which typically corresponds to entity or object in system

Parent
├── Child 1
│   ├── Sub-child 1.1
│   ├── Sub-child 1.2
│   └── Sub-child 1.3
├── Child 2
│   ├── Sub-child 2.1
│   ├── Sub-child 2.2
│   └── Sub-child 2.3
└── Child 3
    ├── Sub-child 3.1
    └── Sub-child 3.2

Network Model (Charles Bachman)( It was formalized by CODASYL based on ideas from IDS.)

This model is generalization of hierarchical model - which will solve many-to-many relationships cant be done by hierarchical model

It uses graph structure consisting of nodes(entities) and edges (relationships) to organize data

It can allows a record to have MORE THAN ONE PARENT SEGMENT, here relationship is called SET

SET - A owner records that is same as of parent hierarchical model and member record that is same as of child in the hierarchical model

Node A
├── Node B
│   ├── Node D
│   └── Node E
├── Node C
│   ├── Node F
│   └── Node G
└── Node H
    ├── Node E
    └── Node F


Relational Database 



Edgar Codd worked for IBM in the development of hard disk systems, and he was not happy with the lack of a search engine in the CODASYL approach, and the IMS model.
He wrote a series of papers, in 1970, outlining novel ways to construct databases. His ideas eventually evolved into a paper titled A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks,
 which described a new method for storing data and processing large databases. Records would not be stored in a free-form list of linked records,
 as in CODASYL navigational model, but instead used a “table with fixed-length records.”

IBM had invested heavily in the IMS model and wasn’t terribly interested in Codd’s ideas. 
Fortunately, some people who didn’t work for IBM were interested. In 1973, Michael Stonebraker and Eugene Wong (both then at UC Berkeley) made the decision to research relational database systems.
The project was called INGRES (Interactive Graphics and Retrieval System) and successfully demonstrated a relational model could be efficient and practical.
INGRES worked with a query language known as QUEL, in turn, pressuring IBM to develop SQL in 1974, which was more advanced (SQL became ANSI and OSI standards in 1986 and 1987).
SQL quickly replaced QUEL as the more functional query language.

Oracle(Larry Ellison,Ed Oates,Bob Miner) brought the first commercial relational database to market in 1979 followed by DB2, SAP Sysbase ASE, and Informix.